+++
title = "Testing Go gRPC Server Using an in-memory Buffer with `bufconn`"
description = "Testing Go gRPC Server Using an in-memory Buffer with `bufconn`"
tags = [ "go", "golang", "development", "testing"]
date = "2020-01-17"
categories = [ "development", "golang", "testing"]
+++

It can be cumbersome to setup a testing environment targeting a live server
to implement full API testing against your gRPC server. Even spinning up a
server from your test file can lead to unintended consequences that require
you to allocate a TCP port (parallel runs, multiple runs under same CI
server).

[bufconn](https://godoc.org/google.golang.org/grpc/test/bufconn) is a package
which provides a `Listener` object that implements `net.Conn`. We can
substitute this listener in a gRPC server - allowing us to spin up a server
that acts as a full-fledged server that can be used for testing that talks
over an in-memory buffer instead of a real port.

## Goals

- Spin up a gRPC server using an in-memory buffer
- Use the server in a standard `testing.Test` test function

## Setup

Same as my other post, I created a simple gRPC service that implements `Ping`
and `StreamPring`. Calling `Ping` replies with (you guessed it!) a
`pong` message. `StreamPing` is similar, but you can specify how many times
it `pong`'s back.

```protobuf
syntax = "proto3";

package ping;

option go_package = "protos";

service Pinger {
    rpc Ping(PingRequest) returns (PingResponse) {}
    rpc PingStream (PingRequest) returns (stream PingResponse) {}
}

message PingRequest {
    int32 count = 1;
}


message PingResponse {
    bytes payload = 1;
}
```

## Using `bufconn`

To easily spin up a server and a client that talk over a `bufconn` buffer,
I created a function that is called by the test file:

```go
func server(ctx context.Context) (pb.PingerClient, func()) {
	buffer := 1024 * 1024
	listener := bufconn.Listen(buffer)

	s := grpc.NewServer()
	pb.RegisterPingerServer(s, &Pinger{})
	go func() {
		if err := s.Serve(listener); err != nil {
			panic(err)
		}
	}()

	conn, _ := grpc.DialContext(ctx, "", grpc.WithContextDialer(func(context.Context, string) (net.Conn, error) {
		return listener.Dial()
	}), grpc.WithInsecure(), grpc.WithBlock())

	client := pb.NewPingerClient(conn)

	return client, s.Stop
}
```

Important thing to note here are, this function:

- Spins up gRPC server using the bufconn buffer
- Creates a client that talks over the buffer using `gRPC.WithContextDialer`
- Returns function to terminate the listener and the server

## Using the `bufconn` client

With the above function, the rest are easy:

```go
ctx := context.Background()
assert := assert.New(t)

client, closer := server(ctx)
defer closer()

out, err := client.Ping(ctx, tc.in)
assert.Nil(err)

if tc.expected.err == nil {
    assert.Nil(err)
    assert.Equal(tc.expected.out, out)
} else {
    assert.Nil(out)
    assert.Equal(tc.expected.err, err)
}
```

That is the meat of my test. It uses the `server` function, after making sure
the `closer` is defered, it uses the client to make a request. The response
is asserted against expectation. This all happens against a gRPC server,
except it uses `bufconn` instead of a TCP socket.

Source code for the full setup is available
[here](https://github.com/davidharrigan/bufconn-test).

### Conclusion

`bufconn` allows you to spin up a gRPC server that talk over an in-memory
buffer. Tests are fast and reliable, and allows you to easily setup
integration style tests that uses a full server.
